[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Since childhood, I've
been very attracted to water.
I grew up with a swimming
pool in the backyard
and we had a family
boat, so it was always
about exploring the
ocean, basically.
And my parents
wanted me to be safe,
so even from a stage of being
a baby, I learned swimming,
both with my mother,
but also professionally.
And that led into
competitive swimming
and freediving eventually.
So it's been always something
that that's been like a hobby
and then turned
into a profession.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think what happened
to me-- in freediving
was going from
competitive free diving
and becoming a full-time
freediving world champion,
I realized that you didn't
have a big impact, really,
because it's a very small sport.
It's a beautiful sport
and it's a great journey,
but it's still very limited.
So I wanted to reach
a greater audience,
and when I passed the 20-minute
limit breath hold-- so in 2010,
I was the first person on
this planet to surpass that
barrier--
I held my breath for
20 minutes, 10 seconds
because I like to show that
dedication and perfectionism.
So on April 1, to
make it a bit funny,
I held my breath in a shark
tank for 20 minutes, 10 seconds.
And that showed me a new
way of using my sport
to helping more people.
And then I went on to do the
22-minutes Guinness World
Record, the current official
Guinness World Record.
I also did 250 feet
under ice in Speedos,
and that also seemed to start
almost a new trend in health
and Viking swimming,
we call it--
so go and swim when
it's cold, in ice water,
like they do in
Russia and Finland.
And there's a whole
new movement now,
understanding all the benefits
and the energy-raising benefits
from swimming under ice.
Also did 500 feet
with a monofin,
and those were all official
Guinness World Records,
and it was on a show
for Discovery Channel.
So that reached a big
audience, and in that, I
reached my goal of getting the
message out that breathing,
breathwork, and linking
that with your mind really
can have a tremendous impact
on both your performance
but also your daily health.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Well, one of the reasons
for doing the "Speedo dive,"
[CHUCKLES] as we call it--
it's been nicknamed swimming
basically naked under
ice in Greenland--
was to reach, for me,
the epitome of my career
and freediving
and use everything
I've learned to put it
into a kind of masterpiece.
And that's why we
chose Greenland.
We had incredible support
from the local community,
from the people behind
the scenes shooting this,
and it was truly like swimming
on a different planet.
Like when you see movies and
the best Hollywood productions,
this was like being there live.
So even though I swim
with my eyes closed
and I'm very focused--
I'm in a different
mental state--
we still had the
training dives and I also
peek sometimes to
know where I am
so I'm not getting off course.
But that experience of being
in this pristine environment,
its crushing beauty--
and Greenland is truly stunning
because you feel so small,
so it also puts
you in your place.
You know, you're a nobody.
You're just doing some
Guinness World Records.
Who cares?
It's like-- really.
It's all about nature.
And this deep connection
I think, also,
is what connected with people.
Because it's true that it's
difficult for many people
to understand.
What is this freediving?
And it's kind of crazy,
holding your breath.
And some people go on a machine.
Sometimes they dive just
a long distance in a pool.
There's also something
extremely boring
called static-- the one where I
hold my breath for 22 minutes.
Really boring.
But there is a lot of
stuff going on, of course,
mentally and
spiritually behind that.
But it's hard for people to
connect to this experience.
But when you see
somebody dive under ice,
there will be some reaction,
like oh, that's cold,
or that's amazing, or
wow, that's beautiful.
I've never seen images
from under the ice.
So I think that
record brought a lot
of extra dimensions
of beauty and nature
into people's living rooms.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The cold is always a
challenge because you will
die if you're not prepared.
Doctors always talk about
brain freeze or stroke.
So your heart can
basically stop if there
is too big of a shock for the
difference in temperature.
But I had prepared well.
I had done this Guinness
World Record before.
I actually was the
record holder already.
So it was not about
setting a new record.
It was more about
making the perfect dive.
So it was a beautiful
dive and elegant,
and it was actually to show
the serenity of nature.
And we couldn't find a
better place than Greenland
to do this-- swimming
under the ice.
But it's also about luck.
You know?
We did not know the
conditions because I
was the first human being
ever to dive in that lake.
That experience alone-- being
the first human being on this
planet with, soon I
think, 8 billion people--
to be the first to
touch that water,
it was like the
holy grail for me.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The 22-minute dive was
really a wonderful dive.
It was a tough dive, pushing
me to my absolute limit.
But I had trained for the
dive, and I really, really
wanted it to be successful.
You breathe oxygen before,
just so people get the picture,
but you still have
to hold your breath.
So the most difficult thing
about holding your breath
is not lacking oxygen.
Well, then at one point,
you'll become unconscious.
So you have to know how
to change your metabolism
and change your
brain wave activity
and become like in
meditative state.
But the most difficult thing is
to fight the urge to breathe.
So the level of
carbon dioxide, CO2,
keeps rising, rising, rising
because you don't exhale.
So you have nowhere to
put, or store, that CO2.
So your body becomes
extremely acidic.
pH drops like [BRGGG],,
like skydiver.
And it's just very
uncomfortable.
And you're just lying
there, not moving,
but it's like you're
running full-out sprint.
And your legs are burning.
Everything is just going
crazy in your body.
So in that sense,
yes, it looks easy,
in the sense that
you're not moving.
But inside, your body--
it's like a volcano.
There is so much
activity going on,
and you have to control that.
So I think that
that dive-- also,
I did 22.00 to
show a dedication.
And it's not like some
minute here or there.
It's like on the mark that
I had set up to reach.
And I think it also started
maybe a new era in freediving,
in the sense that there
are many ways to freedive.
There are many ways to
demonstrate human skills
and human limitations.
And when doctors say, oh,
you'll have brain damage,
so you'll die after a few
minutes-- there are so
many things in the
conservative way of looking
at medical, anatomical,
physiological, neurological
facts that it really doesn't
add up to what we know today
when we combine it to the
ancient timeless wisdom.
And that is one of
my biggest missions,
is to bridge that gap.
I come from a
background of biology.
I have a master's degree in
biology-- marine biologist--
and I have a PhD in medicine.
So I know a bit of this world,
but I found it very limiting--
so limiting-- beliefs.
And a big part of my "job"
is to break those limits--
for myself, for humanity,
but also for science--
to open up for new discoveries.
And I think when you put
a number right there,
you can't run away from that.
No scientist will say
that didn't happen.
The proof is in the pudding.
So I think once those
records become more accepted,
then the idea of
changing the mindset
and reaching things we
never thought were possible
also becomes more acceptable.
And I guess that's
what it's all about.
When you want to
break limits, you
want to change the
mindset of people.
Scientists or athletes
or everyday people--
you want to change
their mindset to achieve
greater results in life.
And with this dive,
the 22 minutes,
I had my brother
there-- right there.
He's a doctor.
He's taken care of me.
Never freedive alone in water.
But also to be
there with someone
who loves you and supports
you and have that experience
is also very rewarding to me.
It's not just the number,
because a number is just--
somebody will beat
the record eventually.
It's not a big deal.
It's just a number.
It's more the experience
in itself that's wonderful.
And it opens this
dialogue with science.
Right?
Next week, I'm speaking at
the American Association
for Respiratory Care.
I'm a keynote speaker there.
I'm actually giving a keynote
that they get credit for--
continuous educational credit.
So this would
never have happened
had I not done this 22-minute
Guinness World Record.
So in that sense, it's
"proof" that it does matter,
and when you put yourself on
the line and make these records
it actually opens the world for
new, amazing things to happen,
and then, again,
reflects back, hopefully,
on everyday people-- health,
nutrition, life, mindset,
and ways to treat patients
and illness from a little bit
different perspective.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The experience with
the killer whales
was completely
out of this world.
To be able to swim with an apex
predator like that, up close--
not just one, but a whole pod--
and interact with a family.
I was fortunate enough to be
able to even hunt with them
side by side.
When they're catching
herring, they
try to get them into what
they call a bait ball.
And they swim around and they
actually bring it up from deep,
deep down.
The herring up in
Norway, they're
hard in hiding in
these deep fjords,
and they're just
kind of on idle.
In the winter
season, they are just
waiting to go down and
spawn when spring comes,
so they're just kind
of sitting there, not
spending too much energy.
But they have stored all
this energy to stay there,
so they're big and
fat, and that's
what the killer whales want.
And the males send a
young male down-- a scout.
And that's also, I
think, we've kind of
found out-- that's
what I saw-- they have
this white patch on the belly.
So when they turn,
the light reflects,
and it's like a scare
signal, and the fish
start to swim
towards the surface,
and that's when
they can catch them.
And I was in the middle
of all this havoc and all
this craziness.
Had killer whales
brush right next to me.
My only fear was
that they thought
I was going to steal the food.
I was not afraid that
they would attack me.
I tend not to be
a fearful person.
I don't live my
life out of fear.
I live it out of passion.
And I really was curious to get
to know these animals better
and see them.
And they have big, beautiful
smiles and big teeth.
And a big male, a
big bull, is 10 tons.
So the flukes are
like a grown person--
6, 7, 8 feet long each.
The dorsal fin-- you know,
this erect dorsal fin that you
see from the healthy
population of killer whales,
it's also 8-feet tall.
So it's a gigantic animal.
And in the water, that
also enlarges a bit more--
about 30%.
You're like-- it's a dinosaur,
right in front of you.
They come from that time, even.
So just to be there
is so mind blowing
that you don't feel fear.
That's my honest impression
of being with them.
Then maybe when you reflect
on it or something--
I had one incidence
where I got scared,
but that's different than fear.
I got really afraid--
not afraid.
No-- afraid, no.
I got scared-- or shocked
because a young killer
whale came sprinting in
and took a bite of my fin.
I had carbon fins on.
I also had a monofin, but at
that time I had carbon fins on.
And I think it was just like a
little toddler or a teenager--
you know, curious.
What is this guy doing here?
I'll just see if I can
literally "pull his leg."
[LAUGHS] So he raced in and
took a little bite-- but just
a nibble.
Just a nibble.
But I was about to go
up and reach the surface
and I just looked down and
I saw this huge black thing
racing in, you know, [LAUGHS]
taking a bite of my leg.
And I was like
[BRGGG] it's even--
and the food is like--
bubbles just explode out
of my mouth, like ahh!
So it's not like I'm a
"Superman," you know?
[LAUGHS] I'm just human, but
I tend not to live out of
fear-- out of
interest and passion.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The reason breathing
is so powerful is
because everybody can do it.
And we all breathing, actually,
about 30,000 times each day.
And this alone is
the first thing
that people don't realize.
They're breathing
25,000 to 30,000 times.
Why not make the best of it?
Second of all, we
are not taught how
to breathe in this modern
day and age, so we lost that.
That's lost in translation,
from other cultures--
all cultures throughout
thousands of years
have this deep
tradition in breathing,
connecting the breath
to the mind to the heart
to the spirit to love
to compassion to health,
basically.
And performance.
So in modern science, when
science becomes too arrogant
and too conservative,
we tend to discard
some of all this knowledge
that's been there and passed
down from generations.
And this is what I
try to bring back.
So from a background
as a scientist
and from the peak
performance in sports,
I also have a profound interest
in the timeless wisdom--
so yoga, meditation,
and breathwork.
And I think it started
because I swam in my pool.
I actually-- I was much
more below the surface,
like most kids, basically,
when I was young.
I was a competitive swimmer,
but I got hell from my coaches
because I would love to
dive under and sit and wait
till the guys had done two laps
and then I would start again.
So kind of like cheating,
but because it was fun.
And then also just to
test my capabilities.
So in my home, I would
dive with my brother,
and we would throw little
animals in-- rubber animals.
I was allergic, as a
child, to guinea pigs.
I had guinea pigs and we
had to get rid of those.
And so I was diving
for all these animals.
And on one breath, see how
many animals we could catch.
And at that same time--
I was five years old--
I developed severe asthma
from those guinea pigs and all
the grass and all the
hay and all this stuff
we brought into the house.
And I was a very
active child, and I'm
absolutely certain
I would have gotten
this diagnosis of ADHD
stamped right in my forehead
if it had been today.
But I was just a very energetic
child, very curious by nature.
And that shift in
my everyday life--
going from being very strong
and kind of athletic--
even as a child,
a little monkey--
I ran around all the time;
I had so much energy--
to suddenly just being quiet.
And I remember, from this
horrible feeling of not
being able to get enough air.
[WHEEZES SHARPLY] Painful--
like this wheezing.
[WHEEZES SHARPLY] I
remember it especially
before falling asleep.
I was, like I said,
about five years old.
So I think, as a
child, your body
stores memories in a
different way than your brain,
so it's probably something
that I worked through.
But it probably stuck with me.
So somehow, I think
it was kind of a gift.
So when I was four and
a half, five years old,
I got to understand the
importance of breathing.
So going from being a normal
child, running around,
suddenly there
was something that
stopped me from doing what
I loved-- running, catching
animals.
Even, I cried like
a baby when we
had to give those guinea
pigs to another family
because we couldn't keep them.
So I think that that
understanding of breath
and what it does for
your everyday life
and for your performance--
because I already did swimming
at that time--
really stuck with me.
So then I went on to
become a biologist.
I went into medicine.
I did the PhD and my research.
And for those 15 years of
studying biology and medicine,
we have done every test you can
imagine on my lungs, on my--
I eventually "cured
myself" from the asthma,
so the breathwork
really helped in that.
And that's what I've
seen over and over again.
So all those things led
up to me putting all that
into a framework.
I call it Breatheology.
So it's a system where you
use meditation, breathing,
and mindfulness, and basically
just awareness of the breath.
That's the basic idea.
And so that's the first
step-- being aware.
OK.
I can actually control
this breathing.
Wow.
And then you start
explaining to people,
you have a vagus nerve--
the 10th cranial nerve.
It sits in your control center
in the back of your neck, so
to speak, top of the brainstem.
And it sends out
this nerve, which
is called the wandering nerve.
The vagus nerve means
the wandering nerve.
It's the largest
nerve that we have.
3 feet long.
So almost 1 meter.
And this nerve goes
straight into your heart.
And it goes to your lungs.
And it goes, actually,
to all your intestines.
So from understanding breathing
and that you can actually
get control of your heart-- this
is what many people don't get,
especially scientists.
They're like, but how can
you lower your heart rate?
And I always ask people,
have you been stressed?
Sure.
All the time.
Can you raise your heart rate?
Yeah, sure.
It goes up when I get nervous.
Do the opposite.
Lower your heart rate.
Use your breathing.
Understand the incredible
power of your mind
connected with breathwork.
So when you lower your
heart rate, what happens?
Blood pressure goes down.
What happens then?
Adrenaline production
is minimized.
What happens then?
Serotonin, dopamine, all
those other "happy hormones,"
as I call them, have
more time to be produced.
And since adrenaline and--
they are like two
different systems.
They can't be active
at the same time.
It's like a dual
system, like a tree.
So one is the
sympathetic system.
It's the adrenaline, the
cortisol, the stress.
It's called fight and flight.
And then you have
the parasympathetic.
That's called the
rest and digest.
But it's the relaxed,
regenerative, feeling good,
feeling relaxed system.
So both are very important in
survival and in regeneration,
but we live way too much
in the stress system.
So when people
understand, oh my gosh,
I actually have the
ability, with a simple thing
as breathing, to connect
to my heart and my lungs.
Because I think the biggest
thing the science hasn't caught
on to yet [CHUCKLES] is the
connection between the heart
and the lungs and the mind--
meaning the brain--
and behind all that,
the spirit, which of course
doesn't exist in science.
But that triumvirate,
those three powers--
your heart, your
lungs, and your mind--
the mind being able
to control this--
affects everything in your life.
Not just in a physical level.
Also on a spiritual level
and emotional level--
how are you perceived
by other people,
how you perceive things.
Because that energy
is transmitted
from you, both in your
electric energy in your heart,
also in your brain that's
producing electric energy,
even your gut and peptides.
There's a lot of new things
that science is finding out
from Chinese medicine.
So there is an intelligence in
different parts of the body,
and when you can tap
into that intelligence
it becomes more spiritual
and much more powerful
because it gives you the
true power of humanity,
which is using
breath and mind work
and connecting to your organs.
So this is what people have
known in India and in yoga
for thousands of years.
And it's been described
just in different words.
But if you actually
read the Upanishads,
if you read the
old scriptures, you
will understand what
they are saying,
even though some
numbers seem strange.
And it's-- like they
say that can fly.
OK.
So what does it mean?
It probably means that
they can remove themselves
to another place or dream
or visualize things--
so they go somewhere else.
And I've had several
expansions of my mind--
these kind of
surreal experiences.
I've never done drugs,
but I'm high on life
so I don't need to.
But being able to
go other places
and feeling sincerely that
you can travel to any place
and touch anything--
also behind you-- those
expansions of your mind
occur when you do breathwork,
or they can occur.
And you can train
yourself to reach that.
Like any other thing in
life, when you train more,
you become more successful.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think a big reason why we
have been so disconnected
to breathing and to our
bodies and our minds
and our spirits is
because science has become
progressively more arrogant.
It's always been strict and--
I'm a scientist
myself, so I'm not
bashing all scientists in the
world just for their ignorance,
but not being open
to other ideas
and wanting to prove
everything with measurements
or with energies or signals
that are so delicate and so
finely tuned that they're
hard to actually measure,
it doesn't mean
it doesn't exist.
So that's the paradigm.
So I think the breathwork
is so important.
And it's going to
make a shift now
in this day and age,
because we need it.
And when we have
7, 8 billion people
on the planet
collectively starting
to be more aware of breathwork
and the energy change,
that's going to be a
shift of a paradigm.
And I think especially the
awareness of breathing alone--
the fact that people
start to understand,
wow, I can just consciously
tell myself I need to breathe,
and they can tap into
this ancient superpower
of the Vedic times, of the
Indian traditional yoga,
meditation, breathwork--
and then when you start to feel
better, than you do it more.
Then you create what's called
a conditioned response.
So it becomes a good
habit, basically.
So your nervous system
starts to remember, oh, yeah,
when I did that breathing,
that felt pretty good.
My digestion went up and
I lost a bit of weight
and I actually felt
pretty damn good.
So then you start to do it more.
Then comes the real
bonus-- so the superpower
of breathing, which
is the mind work.
So when you can get
to a point where
you can start to expand your
mind, expand your heart,
and expand your lungs,
obviously, physiologically,
then you're also more
open to the world.
And then you start to see that--
you connect the dots.
So you start to understand that
when you breathe more slowly,
your heart rate goes down.
When you have a balance
between your heart rate
and your lungs and
everything is evened out,
then you're much more calm,
meaning that you don't produce
all the stress
hormones, your brain
has time to think, be creative,
reflective, loving, kind, not
living in this
stressed, scarcity mode.
And that's where the
breathwork comes in.
And it's a forgotten art.
And that's also, of course,
why I'm doing all the work
I'm doing with Breatheology and
the breathwork and the breath
holding.
I'm trying to bring
that back alive.
Because especially in
the yogic traditions,
they talk about the fourth step.
Ashtanga yoga is not
usually what people think,
like physical workout--
Warrior pose and
things like that.
Ashtanga means "eight limbs."
So it's the eight
steps to enlightenment.
And the fourth
step is pranayama.
And prana is the life
energy or universal energy.
It's also called Chi
or Qi in Chinese.
Every tradition has
had its own name.
But it's this life force within
that we can't really measure
or describe.
We can sometimes.
Sometimes not.
But we can feel it.
Right?
It's the energy on a
beautiful morning when you're
walking on the beach
[INHALES] and you're
basically high on life.
When we learn to tap
into that, we also
understand the deeper
traditions of breathwork
related to health and society.
Because the power of
breathing is actually
because every cell needs oxygen.
That's the simple science fact.
So in India, in the
Indian traditions,
they called a cell
"little life."
So every single cell is a
little life, which is true.
If you look scientifically at
a cell, it has mitochondria.
That's like the energy
production store unit.
You have all the proteins.
You have all the enzymes.
You have everything in there.
But it's like a small
globe, with water--
salt water-- and
everything in there,
with combustion and oxygen and
electron transportation chain.
All the energy production
units are there.
So it's self-contained.
You can take a little cell,
put it in a Petri dish,
and it will live for
quite a long time.
So when you get to
understand that you
have 30 trillion
cells in your body
and that every single
cell needs oxygen
because we're aerobic organisms,
meaning that we need air
and oxygen to produce energy.
That's how we produce energy--
water, air, and a little
bit of sugar or energy gas.
That's how we produce energy.
And when people tap into
that, they're like, wow.
I can change my energy
levels, my health status,
and everything, just
from breathing better.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think it's disastrous
that we are not
more connected with our breath.
And this is the real
gift that was passed down
through generations from the
timeless wisdom of all cultures
around the world, when they
were more connected with nature
and the body and the food
they we're eating from nature.
So we have lost that because
science can be arrogant,
science can be proud.
And the irony is that science
is based on things you see.
You observe things, then
you look at the results,
and then you either say, OK,
this is a scientific fact,
or you just discard it.
Then, every 20, 50 years,
you change that belief.
And science changed.
So it's flexible.
Because we learn new things.
And I think it's so sad
that we lost this connection
with breathwork and
being in the moment,
because that is the most
beautiful gift of breath,
is that it makes it easy
for you to bring yourself
into the present.
We live so much in the past--
fears, our mind is so occupied
with things that have happened,
and we can never change that.
[CHUCKLES] What
happened has happened.
That's never going to change.
We can change the way we
look at what happened,
and we can do inner work
and we can do breathwork.
We are also very worried
about the future.
So we live so much
in the future,
and nobody knows what's coming,
and we can't change the future.
So breathing brings you
into the present moment.
And that's what
everybody can do.
So you don't have to
go to a yoga workshop.
You don't need to
buy fancy equipment.
All you need to do is just
sit down where you are
and stop to breathe.
And it doesn't
matter if you do it
from your mouth, which is
wrong, or from your nose, which
is the correct way.
It doesn't matter.
In the beginning, you
just need to start.
And then after a while, you
get to understand that wow,
when I breathe through the nose,
[INHALES] [EXHALES] it feels
pretty relaxing.
And then you start to understand
that your shoulders come down
and that your mind follows.
Because I think that
what science is not
seeing or understanding and
what I'm trying to bring back,
also from a scientific
angle, is the fact
that when you connect
with your breathing,
you connect with everything
in your physical body
and the nervous system.
So you can actually rewire
your nervous system.
That's what I try to
do when I teach people.
So you can get rid of bad
habits and unconscious breathing
patterns that are not
helpful to your performance
or your daily health.
And then you can start
creating new patterns
and new connections
in your brain,
and you can make every cell
come alive at a high level.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The negative things with
unconscious breathing--
that is, not being
aware of your breath--
are all the things
we're seeing today.
Stress.
When I was a child--
I'm 43 years old--
I've never heard of
anyone having stress.
It was not even--
it was coined before
that by Hans Selye,
who said that "Without
stress, there is no life."
So meaning that resistance,
without difficulties,
there is no growth.
There is no development.
So it depends on how you
look on challenges-- if it's
a problem or a challenge.
And I think all the illnesses
we see-- stress leading
to cardiovascular disease,
leading to depression,
it's all a symptom of
the fact that we're not
connected with ourselves
and nature anymore.
It's this huge disconnect.
And the good thing
about breathing
is that it's completely free.
It's right in front of us.
It's right under
our nose, literally.
And it does so many good things,
because not only does it change
your physicality-- so you
relax more in your body,
your muscles become
more relaxed,
the blood transfuses the tissue
better and takes toxins away
and brings more oxygen
to every single cell--
but also the fact that your
mind becomes more alive and more
controlled, more happy.
Because what happens when you
breathe is that every time you
take a breath, your
brain starts to move,
because we have a
hydrostatic system.
The blood and the
lymphatic system,
it's all "water," basically.
It's a liquid.
So when we breathe,
[INHALES] first of all,
the pulse starts to go up.
The heart rate is racing
because we expand the lungs.
The brain is moving.
[INAUDIBLE] Then we exhale.
[EXHALES] Pressure goes down.
We relax.
Heart rate goes down.
Blood pressure goes down.
Brain falls back.
So it's like rocking
a little baby.
And you want to do that gently
and in a nice and soft rhythm.
But that's not how
people breathe.
People breathe
[BREATHES RAPIDLY, UNEVENLY]
unconsciously and stressed
and without awareness.
And the brain-- it's
like in a boxing match.
It's in a fight all the time.
Even at night, when
people have sleep apnea
and have these bad habits
translating into bad sleep,
the brain never gets rest.
What does that mean?
It means that the brain has
many different frequencies.
It operates at different
electrical levels.
So alpha state is the dream
state, the flow state,
where you want to go if
you have peak performance
and want to take it
to the next level.
You can also have beta, which
is awareness-- when you're
listening, when you're
analyzing things,
that's the normal situation.
And you have other
frequencies in the higher
states of meditation.
But from breathwork alone, you
can take control of your mind.
So that is the secret of yoga.
The secret of yoga is that
you quiet those monkeys.
In Indian traditions, they
talk about the monkey mind.
So the monkey mind is like
a little wild teenager.
It's running everywhere.
And it's true.
It's very difficult for anyone,
no matter your training,
to control your mind.
It's very difficult. We have
so many inputs all the time.
That's what you
learn in meditation--
to focus and to cut those inputs
out, or take the inputs in
and accept them, so they
become just omnipresent,
but it's not a
disturbing element.
But from breathing,
you can actually
start to change the way the
brain is thinking and moving.
So it's from a physical control
to a neurological control
to a mental control to
a spiritual control.
So that progression
is the path of yoga.
You go from physicality.
Those are called asanas.
So it's like a workout--
body work.
Then you become more flexible
in your knees, your joints.
You can sit in the Lotus pose.
And the reason why
you want to do this,
it's exactly the same reason.
You do not want to be
distracted in your mind.
So if you move your body,
there is a distraction
because it's called feedback.
The brain tells these
muscles to move,
but the muscle is
then sending a signal
back-- yeah, yeah, got that.
Yup.
I moved.
And the brain says,
OK, that's great.
Then just stay there until
you do another movement.
But if you move, you
have distraction.
So in meditation, it's all
about sitting still for hours.
But you cannot do that if
you don't have a strong back,
if you're not flexible
in your knees,
if you can't open your hips.
So all those things,
it's just basic workout.
And that's where, when you've
seen fitness centers and gyms,
you have yoga, all
this-- it's great.
It's better than not
doing work with the body,
but it's very primitive,
because you're
disconnected from your mind
and from the spiritual aspect.
But it's still OK.
It's a beginning.
Then you move into
higher levels.
So those are the more ethical.
The levels above the physical
level are more ethics--
so how you treat other people,
how you treat yourself,
that you're kind to yourself.
Yama, niyama.
And then you move
into the fourth step
of yoga, which is pranayama, and
that's where the shift changes.
That's where the shift occurs.
So you move from
the physicality--
from the ethical-- so society
and how you react and act--
interact with other people.
And then you move into
pranayama, the breathwork.
And that's where
you start to connect
the body and the
physicality and society
to a higher spiritual level--
meditation.
So awareness, and a
more broad awareness.
And the thing I'm trying
to bring into the world
is the part of
holding your breath.
Because no matter what
happens in your life and you
have stress-- if you
hold your breath,
you will quiet that monkey mind.
So if you just take us a slow
breath in [INHALES] and stop,
the mind stops.
Why?
Because the brain is not moving.
It's not in that middle
of the boxing match.
It's not getting knocked
down all the time,
and there is time to reflect
and time to feel the body.
And the body is then balanced
in the feedback loop.
Then you can think
of other things.
That's why-- and I call
it meditation under water.
But that's just
something I call it.
When you hold your breath
underwater for a prolonged
time, you reach all these
wonderful different states.
And that's because you
tap into the alpha state,
so the brain has a
different electric charge.
And you start to
open your brain.
And thankfully, science
has proven this as well,
so then everyone's happy.
And we can see the brain
opens in so many new areas
when we reach that
state, meaning
that you tap into different
things that were not
accessible before.
And when you then
start to connect
those areas and those thoughts
and basically that network
of trillions of nervous cells,
you get the superpowers.
That's also why, in yoga,
you can develop intuition.
This, of course, is very
good for relationships--
for being a good father, a
good mother, a good friend,
but also for being a good boss.
So those are some of the
things I've been pushing on
for the last 10, 15 years with
the system of Breatheology,
to explain well,
breathwork also does
help your business in the sense
that you become more intuitive.
You make the right decisions.
I was helping a big bank--
I don't want to
mention the name--
I was helping a big bank many
years ago with the brokers
because they needed to
make very quick decisions.
This was millions of
dollars every second.
They made a wrong choice.
So it's about gut
feeling and about making
the right decision.
And breathwork does that to you.
So I try to bring in the
element from pranayama
that is the not breathing.
Because I think there is an
overemphasis on breathing.
First of all, it's good that
we think about breathing.
It's better to think
about breathing
than not think about it, but
it's just one side of the coin.
We also need to
see the other side.
It's the yin and the yang, the
day and the night, the moon
and the sun.
And and I think that freediving
brings that extra element in,
of breath holding.
And we prove it scientifically,
because scientists-- there
are many nice
scientists and they're
very intrigued and interested.
So we have studied
for many years spleen
contraction, extra red
blood cells shooting
into the bloodstream.
It's "natural doping"
is just what I call it.
You get more oxygen that can
be tied to the hemoglobin
molecule, so you get
like a higher octane.
That's why you get
more energetic.
That's also why-- I don't care
that much about this stuff,
but for people, especially
women, that treat their skin
and care about the skin
and their appearance,
it gives you cleaner and nicer
skin, more energetic skin,
because you're cleaning waste
products and toxins better
when you breathe
better and every cell
gets to really optimize
its performance.
And then also, you
get clear eyes.
All this is described in
the Vedic yoga tradition.
You get more wide eyes.
And generally, it just means
that you get better health.
Your immune system
gets boosted, meaning
you don't fall ill
so easily, and you
have more resistance to stress.
So this also means you
can survive better and be
more happy, frankly,
because you're not
fighting pain or
illness in your body,
so you come from a place
of comfort and joy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think there's a lot of
new interesting things
that will see the day of
light regarding breathwork
and the health
status of the body.
Alkaline diet-- changing the
alkalinity in your bloodstream,
meaning the pH value--
we all have to be at
a very fine level.
It can't change too much.
Then we don't feel well.
Because the body is not
just breathing oxygen,
it's actually also producing
other gases in the bloodstream
and those are connected
directly with the pH value.
So when you breathe
more or less,
you change the pH value
of your bloodstream.
And that of course
affects everything,
from digestion to muscular
energy production and so forth.
And with breathwork,
you can actually
tap into changing that.
So if you hyperventilate like
crazy, you can change the pH,
or you can breathe slowly
and preserve more CO2.
And CO2 is also a very
overlooked gas molecule.
Well, for hundreds
of years, people
have known about Carbon
Dioxide, CO2, as well,
which is very important.
It's not just oxygen, but there
is a balance between those two
because they break
down chemically.
And there was a
scientist who said
that over the supply of
oxygen, carbon dioxide spreads
its protective wings.
So in the physical body,
CO2 is also very important.
And when you breathe
correctly, you'll
find that balance of
the oxygen and CO2--
the way it dissociates.
So from breathing,
you can actually
also heal yourself,
or cure yourself,
from different allergies.
And I've seen that in my work.
I've had several people that
I've been helping for other
reasons, post-polio patients,
but they have come to me after,
saying that first of all, they
have increased lung capacity,
so that's great because
"scientifically"
you cannot do that.
If you look at a
medical book, of course
you can, if you work
with your lungs.
Second of all,
several of them have
they've told me that their
allergies have improved.
People with asthma--
like myself,
being a child with
severe asthma--
several times when
I've worked with people
or talked with people in
the freediving community,
they have completely
stopped taking
asthma medicine and inhalers.
So there is a lot
in breathwork that I
think will see that
the day of light
now and in the next
few years and make
a huge shift in the way we
look at illness and prevention.
Because the way that
the health system--
today, it's actually
not a health system.
It's an illness system.
There's a much higher
risk of becoming ill
if you go to hospital because
of all the sick people
there, obviously, but
also because you're not
curing the symptoms.
You're not really taking
care of the root cause.
You're just putting some pills.
Like with children, with
the difficulties of focusing
or balancing the energy.
You give them some
Ritalin or you give them
different things that
completely change
the dynamics of the natural
production of hormones
in the brain.
And I think that
with breathwork,
what we're going to see now
in the next just few years
is that science will catch
up with the understanding
from traditional, timeless
wisdom from the Vedic--
the way that food can
change your alkalinity,
the way that breathwork
actually can change
the way the brain is working.
And then another
thing about breathwork
is also that when you
breathe with your nose,
you also breathe
in nitric oxide.
And this is just 10 years
ago that's three scientists
were awarded the Nobel
Prize, discovering
that nitric oxide actually
expands muscular tissue.
So your blood vessels
expand in your lungs--
the alveoli expand-- when you
do breathwork with the nose.
But it's only been
discovered in this decade.
So there are many new
things that has been known
for thousands of
years in India--
that's why they do breathwork
and do all these things that
people see--
[INHALES] it's because it works.
And of course, they felt
better and felt more healthy,
so they just kept doing it.
Like acupuncture in China.
They could tap into
different energy systems.
And that's the same
with breathwork.
When we start to
understand the power
we can unleash on ourselves
in our everyday lives.
But also, in the medical world,
we'll see a tremendous shift
and we will take health and
performance to the next level.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Visualization is
a huge contributor
to a lot of the success
I've had in my life.
I call it imagery.
That's more a term
from sports psychology,
because visualization makes
you think that you're just
seeing something, in my mind.
So I like the word imagery.
Imagery means that you imagine.
So you use all your senses
to live an experience that
hasn't happened yet.
So when you engage
all your senses--
your tactile, your auditory,
the olfactory, taste--
the more senses, the better--
and inner vision--
so the inner sight--
when you get all
those senses going,
you create a very
strong representation
of an image or an
episode that you
want to happen in your life.
And this means that
everything in your body--
your senses, your tactile, your
thoughts, the way you move,
that way you interact with
people, decisions you make--
repels or propels you
in that direction.
It leads you-- you can
say imagery leads you
in the direction of
the dream vision.
There's this dream that
you want to go there.
So I think what many
people don't understand,
if you're a bit arrogant, like,
ah, just thinking about it
or visualizing, that
doesn't change anything,
[CHUCKLES] it's because
people don't understand
the power of the mind.
And when we use all our senses
and we train different senses--
because some people are better
at learning from hearing
things, some people, like
me, need to touch things,
and other people have
different ways of learning--
but when you can train
all of these skills,
then it becomes more real.
Then you can see it.
You can smell it.
You can touch it.
You can feel it.
You can hear it.
So in your everyday life,
the decisions you make
leads you in that direction.
And subconsciously--
because consciously,
you put that dream.
But subconsciously,
everything in your body,
from your immune system, from
all this inner communication,
the internal communication
between the cells-- so
intracellular
communication-- everything
starts to align and help you
to move in that direction.
So for me, holding my breath
for 22 minutes was a dream.
It was fantasy.
Maybe for many people,
[CHUCKLES] a bit
crazy, I don't know.
But so before I do that,
I become the 22 minutes.
If I'm like, ah, maybe it
can happen someday, or--
no.
It will not happen.
Until my subconscious mind
accepts that it will become
a reality, a physical reality,
I cannot manifest this dream I
have in real life.
So when I do my dives
or my "performances,"
it's just a manifestation
of a long journey
of a dream for whatever
reason that has to happen,
whether it's personnel
or helping humanity,
whatever that reason is.
And for all the dives I do
and all the visualization,
all the work I do, I always
connect it with breathwork.
Because then, you have like
double up on the efficiency.
And this is what is--
it's very overlooked,
even, I think, in
the medical field
and also in sports psychology.
So I try to bring
this to the table.
When you link the breathing to
all the positive reinforcement,
all the happy
thoughts, basically--
all the winning
thoughts, then every time
you breathe on a
more conscious level,
you ignite that
power of possibility.
And it will lead you to
success, in the sense
that you will reach your goal--
and especially when the
breathing becomes also
on the subconscious
level so strong that it
leads your movements,
it leads your thoughts
in that direction.
So I think the basic thing
with realizing something
before it happens is
that it prepares you.
So when you arrive at that
place, it's like coming home.
You have been there before.
So it's not crazy to
you, but you are maybe
crazy to believe it, but
it's like coming home.
So it's just like the
final destination.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I completely understand
people think I'm nuts
and that breath holding
doesn't change the world
and that's it's
kind of suicidal.
OK?
I get that.
And when I shifted more to
the Guinness World Records--
the ice diving, holding
my breath for 20 minutes,
22 minutes eventually--
it's not about me anymore.
I have my four world titles,
world championship titles,
and I had eight or
10 world records.
I lost count because it's
not that important to me.
If I had 12 or 11 or eight,
doesn't change anything
for me or the world.
But what I saw when I started
doing these extreme records
in nature--
so when I did my 20
minutes, 10 seconds,
it was in a shark tank.
So my message was,
to kids, you know,
sharks are beautiful creatures.
They had 20 minutes to eat me.
Nothing happened.
These were big sharks.
So I try to embed a
lot of different things
in my masterpiece.
So it's not about me anymore.
It's about the message I
want to get out to the world.
So sharks on ice,
they don't kill you.
OK.
Also, it's boring to look at
a guy for 20 minutes floating,
so I thought if there
are some sharks,
they have distraction so the
kids could have a fun time.
When I dive under ice, it's
to show that the body can
do so much more.
So it's provoking
science, to say, hey,
there is more to life than
just what you can measure.
Of course, every
measurement device
I had on exploded
[CHUCKLES] and didn't
work because of the
freezing cold temperature.
So all the electrical
devices I had on broke.
But the body worked.
And the mind worked.
And I think the most important
message from my freediving
records is the fact
that it's a metaphor.
It's a metaphor for
a huge challenge.
You're cold, you have
doubt, you're tired,
your body is going crazy
because you can't breathe.
You go against the
strongest reflex
of life, which is breathing.
But when you hold your breath,
you have to go against that.
So of course you
are close to death.
Literally, you're
close to passing out.
But all those things can be
beautiful, if you accept them.
And I think the metaphor
of accepting life-- yeah,
we'll die.
We all die at some
point, sooner or later.
Don't worry about it.
It will happen at some point.
[CHUCKLES] You can't change it.
So that metaphor of being
under huge amounts of stress,
whether it's holding your
breath for a long time
or diving under ice,
freezing temperatures,
but being uncomfortable
in life doesn't
mean that you can't succeed.
So the metaphor
is to show people
that there is light at
the end of the tunnel.
Like, it's literally--
when I dive under the ice,
you're there, but then
the light shines down
from that hole 250 feet ahead
of you, and it welcomes you.
And it's like a rebirth.
You're [INHALES] taking
your first breath
and you're born again.
So for me, the
freediving records
is a metaphor for a
stressful situation,
that when you know how to
control your mind and use
visualization,
imagery, breathwork,
eating healthy, surrounding
yourself with people that
believe in you and
support you, you
can take it to the next level.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think an easier
way to identify
what's holding you back is
looking at your surroundings--
the people you're around, your
natural surroundings, where
you live, where you
go to work every day--
and then looking
at your mindset.
What do you want in life?
And are you happy
with what you have?
Then that's happiness, I guess.
The definition of happiness
is being happy and satisfied.
But if you want more,
then you probably
have to change the situation,
meaning your environment.
And you can do that
internally, through mind work,
visualization, breathwork.
You can take the
breath from outside
and take it in so it's
an inner work, reflecting
on your mind and your
spiritual energy.
But you can also change
the surroundings.
So what people used to do is
they go traveling, or athletes,
they go to a training camp
and surround themselves
with the best athletes in
the world in their field.
And if it's got
to be even better,
you surround yourself
with different athletes,
because you learn new things
from different walks of life.
Same in business.
If you want to
excel in business,
speak with different people that
are in different businesses.
You'll learn different things.
So if you have limiting beliefs,
it's probably not your fault,
in the sense that it's maybe
your parents or somebody
around you did not set you
free or let you be a little bit
crazy, but that's not an
excuse for not changing it.
So you can start to do simple
things, as walking in nature,
starting to work
out a little bit.
I'm not saying or
advocating everybody
should be like a fitness
model, but at least
just to taking a bit
of responsibility
for your own health,
your body, this temple
that we are born in.
We should appreciate and
be thankful every day.
And I think a simple
thing as breathing--
connecting the
body and the mind--
is something that people
can start doing right away.
Because then they get
in tune with the body.
Literally, they get in tune with
their heart rate and the way
that the lungs are expanding.
And that reflects in the mind.
And when you start
to then understand
that you can control
your mind and start
to go in a different
direction, it
can lead to unlimited
dreams and possibilities.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The most important
relationship for my success
has been the relationship
with my grandmother.
When I was five years old,
my grandfather passed,
so she spent a lot
of time with us.
I'm half Swedish, so she
lived in another country.
I'm Danish.
So she would come and stay with
us, and I spent a lot of time
with my grandmother.
And she's the one I've loved
the most in my whole life.
And she always believed in me.
She believed in everything
I did, and she supported me.
And she was very smart.
She spoke a lot of languages.
She passed on her
next journey recently.
She lived to become
almost 101 years old
and she was absolutely ready,
so everything was fine.
And she was strong and
healthy and thankful
to the last minute.
And I learned tremendous amounts
of life, knowledge, and wisdom
from her.
But she always believed
in me, and she always
listened to my
projects, crazy things.
She didn't always
like them [CHUCKLES]
because she was a bit
afraid that something
would happen to me.
So she would say on the
phone, please be careful.
And, is that a good idea?
But I know that's
what you want, and I
think it's wonderful you're
going to try to dive under ice.
It sounds dangerous, but I
think when you want this,
it's going to be wonderful.
And the thing I took most from
my grandmother, this legacy,
is from childhood, she was
taking care of from me.
I have wonderful
parents, so it's not
that only my grandmother
took care of me,
but she was there in
a big part of my life.
And when I grew up, I always
spent a lot of time with her.
And the biggest gift
that she gave me
was to help me to
understand health,
because she liked to
move and do gymnastics.
She gave me the
fifth-year gold needle
from her gymnastics class.
She gave me her father's, so
my great-grandfather's, trophy
from being the best
athlete in the city.
So it's a big horn, but silver.
I have that like a trophy, of
a family heritage of health
and doing something
good in society.
And eating healthy.
She did all the food, from--
we went hunting.
My grandfather was a big
hunter, so we went hunting.
We would go fishing.
So eating from nature.
So clean food.
Actually cooking and making food
from real food, from animals.
Being thankful.
She always told me, be thankful.
She taught me prayers.
Gratitude, not in
a religious matter,
necessarily, but
just being grateful.
And the most important
thing, probably,
is that she always told me--
she told me, you
are so talented.
You are so gifted.
You have all these things that
were passed down from her.
(VOICE BREAKING) You
know, you're not your--
you're just your genes,
basically, in a family.
You're not-- you know,
it's just given to you.
So.
>> She believed in you.
>> Yeah.
>> Did that help you
believe in yourself?
>> Yeah, absolutely.
Absolutely.
And I think the biggest gift
was the fact that she taught me
that you have all
these gifts, but you're
obliged to help other people.
When it's easy for
you in life, it's
your duty to help other people.
If you don't have
help and support,
it's difficult to
help other people.
So yeah, she helped me a lot.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Well, who am I to talk
about lasting fulfillment?
I'm like just a spring
chicken in the middle of life,
in the stream of life.
You probably have
to ask some older
people or some wise people.
>> What did your
[INAUDIBLE] say?
>> My grandmother always told
me that being thankful is one
of the biggest part
of becoming old.
And I think what
thankfulness does
is that it makes you
accept things as they are.
And you don't hold grudges.
You're not negative.
You come from a
positive mindset.
Meaning that you're also good
to yourself on all levels.
Eating more healthy.
Breathing more consciously.
Thinking more positively.
Surrounding yourself
with nice people,
and saying no to
negative people.
Not letting that
influence your life.
Not letting that occupy
space in your mind.
Not letting disbelief take
you away from your dreams,
basically.
So gratitude, thankfulness,
and then of course movement.
Gymnastics.
Walking.
Simple things, but just
taking care of your body.
And this is timeless wisdom,
even from the Greeks.
A healthy body and
a healthy mind.
It's all connected and we
need to take care of both.
And that's the disconnect
that maybe in modern times,
that we are not so connected
to the mind and especially not
to the spiritual aspects.
So it's about being passionate
about being given, and fighting
for, your possibility
of living your dreams.
So I always loved animals.
I wanted to grow up
to become a biologist.
I was lucky that I was born
in a country where education
is free, and I was lucky
that my grandmother helped me
with my studies, and my mother.
And so it's about environment,
and it's about being thankful
and being a dreamer.
And I think when we start to
come back to our bodies, that's
the first step.
Then we start to understand
how we can affect the heart,
and then we understand love
on a deeper perspective.
Because your heart shines
this energy around you.
We have these auras.
All tradition have
an aura, whether it's
Jesus with the halo,
whether it's the Buddha,
we always have
something above here.
So something, an
energy, around us.
So a charisma or aura.
There are many names,
but this energy
that transcends the
body, the limitations
of our physical body.
And it's so simple to
me, even though I'm
a scientist, that there
is so much more to life.
Because I could
challenge any scientist
and say, OK, so are you married?
Yes.
If it's a man, if he's married
to a woman, I would say,
do you love your wife?
Yes.
All right.
Show me the formula.
I want to see the
formula for love.
You know?
There is no formula.
I want to see the proof.
I want to see the
measurements for love.
And he would probably
say, uh, yeah,
I don't have those
measurements yet.
I didn't do those lab studies.
My point being that there are so
many energies and so much power
and so much connection
on many levels
that are just
difficult to measure.
But it doesn't mean that
they're not existing.
And love, of course--
everything is about
love-- to yourself,
towards animals, towards
nature, being kind-natured.
And from breathwork
and from meditation,
you have that direct
connection with your heart.
And I think that's one of
the strongest things I've
learned when I started
freediving, is that when you
hold your breath, there
is something called
the mammalian dive response.
So it's a reflex
all people have.
It's not just freedivers,
but freedivers
learn to tap into this reflex.
And what it does is the
heart rate lowers quickly,
the mind settles, and the
body kind of shuts down,
so you go into idle.
Wooo.
And that's where there's time
for reflection for bigger
things and for
bigger performances,
because the body can do things
that under normal circumstances
it cannot do.
So what I try is to bring
those reflexes on the forefront
to people and say, hey,
if you breathe and breathe
into your heart,
you can actually
control your heart rate.
Really?
Yeah.
Look at your little device.
Everyone has a little variable
today on a smartphone.
And then you can see it.
And it's the same
with breath holding.
Just hold your breath.
And after a while, the heart
starts to beat more slowly--
it's called bradycardia--
because the body
wants to save oxygen.
So we have all these
wonderful things.
I think our body, it's
the most amazing thing.
You know, combined
with the mind.
And with the breath,
we have direct access
to all our organs.
That's also one of
the secrets of yoga.
You can tap into the
parasympathetic nervous system.
Meaning, you can
go into your heart.
You can travel-- not just
visualize your travel,
but you can literally travel
from the breath into the nerve
and connect with that
wire into your heart.
And when I hold my
breath for a long time,
I change the way the
heart is beating.
Not just the pulse.
That's a primitive,
scientific way
of looking at the
heart-- the pulse.
Much more important is the
heart rate variability.
So how is the change
of beats in the heart?
And even more importantly--
I talked with an
Italian heart surgeon.
He's a freediver.
He said, if you tell
people what you tell me,
people will tell
you you're crazy.
Because when I hold my
breath for a long time,
I have a dialogue with my heart.
I don't demand.
I just kindly ask,
could you, just
for a few minutes, 20 minutes
maybe, beat a little bit more
softly?
Could you just relax completely?
And I feel that
shift in the heart.
It opens up and
it becomes softer.
And from going from
[FAST PUFFS],, [FAST PUFFS],,
[FAST PUFFS],, it goes to
[SLOW PUFFS],, [SLOW PUFFS],,
[SLOW PUFFS].
That saves oxygen.
It saves brainpower.
Saves basically
everything in your energy
so you can hold
your breath longer.
And you can do that
in all things in life.
So I try to bring the
breath holding part in,
which in pranayama is
also very important,
but it's forgotten in
normal, modern "yoga."
So I try to bring both
sides of the coin to people
and give them choices
to actually use this
in an everyday life situation.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The most wonderful
thing about breathing
is that it's easy to access.
People breathe 25,000,
30,000 times each day,
and probably breathe about
70% of their maximal capacity.
That is a rough estimate
that I just give you.
Now, what if you could move
that towards 80, 90, 95, 100?
Then every breath would
give you more energy.
You would be more
resistant to stress,
so you would have
stronger resilience.
Of course, you'd perform
better as an athlete,
or as a father, mother,
friend, a business owner,
but you would also live longer.
So in India, they don't
measure life in time.
They measure in breath.
So you have about one
billion breath in a lifetime,
if you do the math.
10 million breath a
year times 100 years.
If you live that long,
that's a billion breath.
So what I hope to tell
people, or my message,
is to just move that barrier--
which is everything
that we've talked about,
moving to the next level--
your cells, your mind, what you
eat, people you hang out with--
and move that breathing
and the conscious breathing
up towards 80%, 90%, 100%
so every breath you take
is living your life
to the fullest.
Meaning that your cells
are working optimally.
You're digesting much better.
You're not keeping and
holding on to waste products.
You can also lose weight
easier because you're not
in a panic mode.
You're more open and
loving towards yourself.
And breathing, because it's
soft, also softens your mind
and it softens your body.
So the best thing for people
to do if they've never
done breathwork is just
to be, first of all,
conscious about breathing.
Second of all, use the nose
because you want that nitrogen
oxide-- you want that extra
molecule that people have--
to actually make more
oxygen jump into your lungs
because the alveoli, the blood
vascular system in the lungs,
open more when you
breathe with your nose.
And then when they
do a slow exhale,
they tap into the vagus nerve.
So when people breathe what
I call 1, 2 breathing--
the ratio of 1 to 2--
so 1 to 2 is just one inhalation
is, for example, four seconds.
[INHALES]
And then there's a slight pause.
This is very important.
And then there's an
exhale for 8 seconds,
so the double amount of time.
[EXHALES]
And a pause again.
And then your body tells you
to breathe and you start again.
[INHALES]
And the breathing comes from
the belly, from the diaphragm.
You're just completely
relaxing the shoulders.
Your lower jaw is dropping
down a little bit.
Your tongue falls to the bottom
of the floor of the mouth.
Your eyes and your
forehead relax.
And that translate
quickly into your brain.
And then you exhale again.
[EXHALES] So 1, 2 breathing,
conscious breathing,
it's the best way to conquer
any stressful situation in life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Well, the simple reason for
discovering your purpose
is of course to leave a legacy,
to leave something behind when
you go on your next journey.
So if people have
not found that yet
or they don't know
what it is, they
should keep searching, because
it would be a waste of life
if you're not contributing to
society and people around you--
people that you love, but also
people further down the road.
And for me, people often think
that I'm super structured
and, oh, you're planning
all these things.
I'm completely a disaster
in planning and knowing
where to go.
And I always tell,
especially young people,
when I give presentations
or lectures,
it doesn't matter if you
don't know where you're going.
The most important
thing is that you
know what you don't want to do.
That's my honest opinion.
If you are doing
something you don't like,
something you don't
love, stop it.
Why would you keep doing it?
But this is also like a
catch-22, tricky situation.
Because if you're a solo mom
with three kids and having
problems with your income and
just fighting to get everyday
life balancing, it's not the
first thing you wake up-- like,
oh, yeah, I have to help all
these people in the world today
and--
it would be a wonderful thought,
but you're just right here
in this difficult situation.
That will change,
hopefully, for anyone
in any part of the
world with time.
But for me, it's been a
really wandering road.
It's kind of like when I speak.
I speak about something and I
go in 5 different directions,
but I always come back.
So that is my strength.
And I think that is the
strength people should find,
is this stubbornness,
this continuity.
Just keep going, keep going,
and having the beliefs
that everything will be OK.
So I always loved animal.
I became a biologist.
There was no other way.
Again, I was lucky.
I was born in a country
I could get education.
I had wonderful
support in my family.
But I became a biologist because
I love nature and animals.
It's still the thing I
love the most in the world,
is watching animals; learn
about paleontology-- where
did we come from; learning
about how they communicate
because that translates to
so many other things in life.
Then I studied medicine.
I always had the swimming
and the freediving,
but that became
more professional.
Then I became ill
when I was a child.
I had severe asthma.
And that subconsciously
probably led
me to reflect more on
breathing and the importance
of proper breathing.
And then in science, and
my journeys to India,
and my peak performance sport--
so the freediving records--
brought that breath holding
aspect into the completeness
of breathwork.
So that's when I created this
framework of Breatheology.
Because there was
something missing.
If you are just
breathing, breathing
is actually stressful.
Taking the breath is stressful.
The exhale is what relaxes you.
I always tell people
the key to relaxation
is in the exhalation.
So I think for people to not
do what they were meant to do,
or this greater purpose,
is a waste of life.
And where do you find
that purpose, then?
For me, it's helping
the world to breathe
better, one breath at a time.
When you find that
purpose, you against
start to visualize and dream
and look for people that
can help you and support you.
And you move forward.
And you move five
steps backwards.
And then again, you push.
And it's this ongoing journey.
And then when you start to see
the results and the change,
that is the biggest fulfilling.
So that is fulfillment in life.
That is being gifted with
all these wonderful stories
of people's lives
you have changed,
from a simple thing as breathing
or from changing the mindset.
And I have no doubt
that breathing
will be the next revolution,
everything-- in science,
in medicine, in prevention, in
treatment, and rehabilitation.
So in all aspects of
the health care system,
breathing will be
a big, big part.
And I also think for
children and schools-- that's
one of my big
missions, as well--
to get to yoga,
breathing, meditation
into every single
school of the world.
Because if you as a child
learn to breathe consciously,
then you don't have
all these challenges
that we're facing now, and you
don't have all those issues
with stress and illness to
this same extreme degree
as we're seeing
now in the world.
And that is creating good
habits and creating a stronger
relationship with
yourself and nature.
And I think the easiest way to
find your purpose is actually
to tune into your true nature,
because you have it in you.
It's not-- I don't know
where it comes from.
Couldn't say it's in your genes,
but it's probably passed down
from generations to you.
Different skills,
different things
that were important to
survive, different tactics,
different ways of thinking,
all this is passed down to you.
And then of course
there's the environment
and the way you train your mind
and take care of your body.
So whether you have found
your purpose or not,
you should keep searching.
Whether you have found
your purpose in life or not
doesn't really matter.
You should hopefully find
it at some point, the sooner
the better, so you can serve and
help other people around you.
And you get a tremendous amount
of love and thankfulness back.
And this is what will bring
fulfillment in your life.
So for me, starting as
a child with asthma,
becoming a scientist, doing
my PhD degree in medicine,
moving into more
professional freediving,
setting world records--
Guinness World Records--
breaking these limiting beliefs
and showing the world
that in my world,
breath holding for more
than 20 minutes is possible,
diving under ice is possible--
all those things
have meant nothing
if I didn't succeed
in translating
all that into something that
brings purpose to other people.
So for me, it's breathwork.
So it's helping people to
become more aware of breath,
the power of breath, how
they can cure themselves,
treat themselves for
stress, different diseases.
But it's also bringing in the
aspect of breath holding--
so pausing.
So it's also a metaphor
for just taking a break.
Relax.
It's going to be OK.
And when you combine
the breathing--
the energy, the life
force-- and the breath
holding-- the pause, the
giving in, the letting go,
the acceptance of
death, basically--
and you bring
those two together,
you have balance in life.
So for me, purpose
is the fulfillment
of helping millions
of other people--
which I'm already doing now--
discover the unlimited
power of breathwork.
Another thing that's
very important
when you talk about
purpose in life
is that you should always
believe in yourself.
Don't think that your
dream is too small,
that it's not important.
Because what I've seen with all
the wonderful, talented, loving
people I've met
around the world is
that what holds people
back-- of course
it's a limiting belief
that they're not important
or their hobby, their passion,
is not important enough.
But when you start to look
at the bigger picture--
let's take my example.
So I help people breathe better.
Who cares?
OK, he was breathing
a little bit better.
No.
I help one person
to breathe better--
it could be from a traumatic
event, could be from stress,
could be from PTSD, it
could be from illness--
what happens then?
That whole family
starts to heal.
Right?
What happens then?
The kid has an easier
time at school,
focusing on the homework,
getting better grades,
getting an education.
What happens then?
The whole neighborhood
starts to--
they have a party at summer.
Then they can be resourceful
and bring some food.
What happens then?
It spreads out of the community.
So what I'm trying to say is
that when you find your purpose
in life, stick with that
and believe in yourself,
because you need to believe so
much in yourself that you also
convince other people.
And then good
things will happen.
So it's a rippling
effect, I'm talking about,
from your passion.
Because that translate--
passion, I think,
is one of the strongest
driving force in life.
Passion is also love.
Passion is giving love
to one area in your life,
whether it's arts or
nature or architecture--
anything in life that you
spend your precious time on.
And that is why passion
is so powerful, because it
translates, it travels through
the creation of your work
to other people on many levels.
And art is a good example.
The beauty-- and
sport, of course, also.
The peak performance.
Maybe people don't
understand it,
but there is a message that
travels and reaches them.
That's why when you see
the pain in athletes
or you see the victory,
you identify yourself
in that, but maybe in
your life struggle, maybe
your financial situation.
So you're not a runner.
OK, you didn't run
a marathon, but you
have been working nine
to five for 12 years,
supporting three kids,
so that's a marathon.
So I think when people stick
to what they love and find
that purpose, it will
help the world change.
[MUSIC PLAYING]